welcome to another video in this video
you will learn everything you need to
know about implied volatility what
implied volatility rang is in Wyatt
mattress so let's get started first of
all what is implied volatility implied
volatility can be derived from options
pricing models such as the black Scholes
options pricing model it can be thought
of as they expected likelihood of
certain price changes in the underlying
asset but what does that mean to
understand this let's break down what
goes into an options price the black
Scholes formula uses the following
variables to calculate an options price
the underlying price the strike price
the expiration date the risk-free rate
and implied volatility the first two
factors are quite obvious because they
determine the intrinsic value of an
option the expiration date also makes a
lot of sense as more time to expiration
gives your position more time to work
thus time to expiration should
definitely affect the price of an option
the risk-free rate only has a very small
effect on an options price and doesn't
change significantly over short periods
of time therefore it can be ignored for
now last but not least the volatility of
the underlying asset should also affect
the options price because more volatile
assets tend to give an options trader
more opportunity to profit from price
swings
whereas on volatile assets have limited
trading opportunities for instance a far
out of the money option is far more
likely to become in the money if the
underlying asset is very volatile then
if it's not therefore volatility is one
of the factors used to calculate a
theoretical options price however as you
might have noticed it's fairly easy to
observe and measure the underlying price
strike price and times we'll explain
but it's not as straightforward to
measure the volatility of the security
especially not the future volatility
that's why models such as the black
Scholes model use a formula to determine
the implied volatility from the options
price instead of the options price from
the implied volatility an options price
can be observed in the markets together
with all the other factors except for
volatility from all this you can
calculate a theoretical volatility value
this volatility value is implied from
the options price therefore it's called
implied volatility so when you hear in
some financial news that options traders
are expecting upcoming volatility what
they're really saying is that the
volatility implied by the current option
prices where the implied volatility is
relatively high note that implied
volatility is not the same as historical
volatility historical volatility is the
past actual volatility and it does not
affect the options price whereas implied
volatility does furthermore implied
volatility is a purely theoretical value
therefore implied volatility values
often differ from the actual volatility
values over certain time periods
hopefully this helps you understand what
implied volatility is but why is implied
volatility even important first of all
it's one of the main factors affecting
an options price this alone is one
reason why you as an options trader
should pay attention to IV furthermore
implied volatility can give you insight
into what kind of volatility the market
is expecting you can compare the
expected volatility to your own analysis
and potentially build a position around
the difference in these two
an options trader should always look at
implied volatility as well as the
underlying trading price expiration date
and strike price before putting on a
position it's also possible to use
implied volatility to calculate the
expected price range of an underlying
asset until the expiration date to
understand this let's first take a look
at a normal distribution diagram
depending on which model you use you
might assume that stock price changes
are distributed like this that would
mean that 68% of the time price only
changed slightly and the bigger a price
move is the less likely it becomes the
one standard deviation move for less
happens about six to eight percent of
the time the two standard deviation move
where anything less happens about 95
percent of the time and so on this isn't
necessarily a very realistic
distribution for stock prices because
bigger moves happen far more often than
they should according to a normal
distribution furthermore prices can move
more to the up side than they can to the
downside nevertheless a normal
distribution is commonly used and it
helps to understand what the expected
move of the stock is if you use the
normal distribution you can calculate
the expected move of an asset through
this formula one standard deviation
equals plus or minus implied volatility
times the underlying price times the
square root of the time to expiration
divided by 365 two standard deviations
can be calculated by multiplying the one
standard deviation move by two and so on
implied volatility is normally quoted on
an annualized basis that's why we divide
the time to expiration by 365 to get the
expected range until the expiration date
let's look at an example to clarify all
this stock XYZ is trading at
dollars we will first look at an option
with 30 days left till expiration and an
implied volatility of 40% so the one
standard deviation range over the next
30 days is plus minus 0.4 times 100
times the square root of 30 divided by
365 this is about plus minus 11.5 which
means the one standard deviation range
over the next 30 days is 88.5 dollars to
ill 100 eleven point five dollars this
means that the markets expect X Y Z's
price to stay between about 88 and 112
dollars over the next 30 days with about
60 AIDS percent probability the two
standard deviation move would be up to
123 dollars were down to $77 now let's
take a look at the same stock with the
same implied volatility but 60 days
instead of 30 days to expiration the one
standard deviation range would now be
about 84 dollars to $116 the two
standard deviation range would be 68 to
$132 this makes sense because XYZ can
obviously move much more in 60 days than
it can in 30 days note that all of this
assumes that the distribution of stock
prices is normal this is not necessarily
a very realistic assumption therefore in
practice other distributions such as the
log normal distribution or other ones
are used much more commonly nevertheless
this simplified explanation of the
expected move should give you a good
idea of what the expected move is and
how you can use it for your trading
luckily you will never really have to
calculate the expected move yourself as
most good broker platforms such as tasty
works will calculate it for you
last but not least let's break down what
implied volatility rank is by now you
have hopefully realized that implied
volatility is an important factor to
look at when trading options when
implied volatility is high options are
priced higher and when implied
volatility is low options are priced
lower but how do you know if implied
volatility is high or low
for instance if stock XYZ has an option
with an implied volatility of 40% and
stock ABC has an option with an implied
volatility level of 30% what does that
mean just because the absolute implied
volatility value of XYZ is higher than
of ABC we can't just assume that it's
implied volatility is higher relative to
itself let me give you a more specific
example to clarify this let's say XYZ is
usually a very volatile stock and has an
average implied volatility of 70% but
now the IV dropped down to 40 percent
whereas ABC tends to have an IV level of
around 20 percent most of the time but
now it's implied volatility has gone up
to 30 percent and this means that ABC's
implied volatility is relatively high
and XYZ is implied volatility is
relatively low even though X Y Z's
absolute volatility is greater than
ABC's I hope that this shows that it's
very hard to compare the implied
volatilities of different securities
because different securities can have
very different trading characteristics
to solve this problem we can use implied
volatility rank IV rank looks at the
past year of implied volatility data of
a stock and then tells you how the
current level of IV is relative to the
past 365 days IV rank is always a value
between 0 and 100 100 being the highest
and 0 the lowest and level of
applied volatility over the past year
here is a brief example stock ABC has an
IV rank of 20 this means that it's
implied volatility is relatively low
because it has been much higher
throughout the past year therefore you
can assume that ABC's options are
relatively cheap compared to past times
if on the other hand IV rank would be at
100 you know that ABC's implied
volatility has never been higher over
the past year and therefore this could
be a good time to sell options because
they are very expensive summed up
implied volatility rank brings some
context to implied volatility here is
the formula that is most commonly used
to calculate IV rank the current IV
level minus the 52-week IV low divided
by the 52-week IV high minus the 52-week
IV low and all of this is multiplied by
100 to get the IV rank note that some
brokers often filter out very extreme
implied volatility values from the past
52 weeks so that IV rank isn't skewed or
distorted by these values and don't
worry you won't have to calculate this
yourself because once again most good
brokers will do this for you taystee
works for instance even allows you to
scan and filter securities by IV rank
this is one of the easiest ways to find
securities with very low or very high
implied volatility values if you
currently do not have a broker platform
that supports IV rank or other features
related to implied volatility I
personally highly recommend taystee
works
they are my favorite broker and you can
check out my full review of tasty works
in the description below
otherwise thanks so much for watching I
really hope that this video could help
you understand implied volatility and
how implied volatility rank works make
sure to subscribe for more trading
related videos and see you in the next
one